DOCS-132 Introduce Quickstart Tutorial for Enterprise Features (#291)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/getting-started/pages/wan.adoc

= Replicate over WAN
:description: In this tutorial, you'll synchronize a map across two Hazelcast clusters, using WAN Replication.

{description}

WAN Replication can work in two modes:

* Active-Passive: An active cluster replicates its maps and/or caches to one or more passive clusters
for the purpose of maintaining a backup. If the active cluster becomes unavailable, you can redirect the application traffic to the passive cluster.
* Active-Active: Each cluster replicates maps and/or caches to all other clusters.

See xref:wan:wan.adoc[here] for an overview of the WAN Replication feature.

This tutorial is for the Active-Passive mode, and you will:

> . Start an Enterprise cluster as a passive one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start a passive Enterprise cluster, without WAN Replication, which will receive updates from the active cluster.
```

> . Start another cluster with WAN Replication configured, this will be the active one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start an active cluster, with WAN Replication configured, which will send updates to the passive cluster.
```

> . Create a map in the active cluster with data in it and see the replication to the passive cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a map in the active cluster and see that the entries are replicated on the passive cluster.
```

> . Modify some map entries in the active cluster and see the modifications in the passive one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Modify some map entries in the active cluster and see the modifications appear in the passive one.
```

== Before You Begin

To complete this tutorial, you need the following:

[cols="1a,1a"]
|===
|Prerequisites|Useful resources

|Trial license
|https://trialrequest.hazelcast.com/[Hazelcast website]

|Docker image for the full Hazelcast distribution
|xref:get-started-enterprise.adoc[Install Hazelcast Enterprise]

|Docker network with the name `hazelcast-network`
|Use the `docker network create hazelcast-network` command 

|===

== Step 1. Start the Passive Cluster

In this step you'll start an Enterprise cluster called `london` with a single member. This will be the **passive** cluster

> which means it does not need WAN Replication to be configured. Run the following Docker command on a terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which means it does not need WAN Replication to be configured. Run the following Docker command in a terminal.
```

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run \
    --network hazelcast-network \
    -e HZ_LICENSEKEY=<your license key> \ <1>
    -e HZ_CLUSTERNAME=london \
    -p 5701:5701 hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise:{full-version}
----

> <1> Replace with your actual Hazelcast Enterprise license key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Replace the `<your license key>` placeholder with your Hazelcast Enterprise license key.
```

The member is up and running now.

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
2021-11-23 11:08:15,055 [ INFO] [main] [c.h.i.c.ClusterService]: [172.18.0.3]:5701 [london] [{full-version}] 

Members {size:1, ver:1} [
	Member [172.18.0.3]:5701 - bed20746-1505-449b-9f4a-548bcdbe12b8 this
]
----

> Note the member's IP address and port since you are going to use it while configuring WAN

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the member's IP address and port since you are going to use it to configure WAN
```

> replication in the active cluster and connecting Management Center.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replication for the active cluster and to connect to Management Center.
```

== Step 2. Start the Active Cluster

Now you'll start another Enterprise cluster called `tokyo` with a single member. This will be the **active** cluster

> which means it does not need WAN Replication to be configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which means it needs WAN Replication to be configured.
```

Since the configuration for WAN Replication is a bit more detailed, you are going to use a Hazelcast configuration
file and pass it to the Docker command, instead of giving all the configuration options in a single command.

> . In an existing or new directory, place a hazelcast.yaml (or xml) file with the following content.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this say to create a directory called `~/config-tokyo`? since this is the one that we mount on the Docker container?

XML::
+
[source,xml]
----
<hazelcast>
    <cluster-name>tokyo</cluster-name>
    <license-key>"your license key"</license-key>
    <wan-replication name="london-wan-rep">
        <batch-publisher>
            <cluster-name>london</cluster-name>
            <publisher-id>londonPublisherId</publisher-id>
            <target-endpoints>172.18.0.3:5701</target-endpoints>
    <map name="cities">
        <wan-replication-ref name="london-wan-rep">
    </map>
</hazelcast>
----
====
. Open a new terminal and start the active cluster.
+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run \
     --network hazelcast-network \
     -e JAVA_OPTS="-Dhazelcast.config=/opt/hazelcast/config_ext/hazelcast.yaml" -v ~/config-tokyo:/opt/hazelcast/config_ext hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise:{full-version}
----

Here is your other single-member cluster:

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
2021-11-23 11:39:14,198 [ INFO] [main] [c.h.i.c.ClusterService]: [172.18.0.4]:5701 [tokyo] [{full-version}] 

Members {size:1, ver:1} [
	Member [172.18.0.4]:5701 - 98d9a815-5eb3-4341-bec1-e9816cee44b5 this
]
----

Note the member's IP address and port since you are going to use it while connecting Management Center.

> See xref:wan:defining-wan-replication.adoc#wanbatchreplication-implementation[Configuring WAN Replication] for

Reviewer: I don't think users need this right now. Maybe move it to the end of the tutorial as next steps.

configuration element descriptions.

== Step 3. Set Up Management Center

. Start Management Center
+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run \
    --network hazelcast-network \
    -p 8080:8080 hazelcast/management-center:{full-version}
----
. Once you see the `Hazelcast Management Center successfully started at http://localhost:8080/` log in the terminal, open a web browser, go to localhost:8080, and enable Dev Mode.
. You will see a **Connect** box on the screen; click on it and enter the passive cluster’s name (`london`) and IP address of its member.
+
image:wan/connect-london-cluster.png[Connect the London cluster]
Management Center is now connected to the `london` cluster.

> . Click again on the **Connect** box enter the active cluster’s name (`tokyo`) and IP address of its member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click **Connect** again and enter the active cluster’s name (`tokyo`) and the IP address of its member.
```

+
image:wan/cluster-connected.png[Both clusters are connected]
Management Center is now connected to the `tokyo` cluster.
. You need to provide your license key; this is needed since you are going to use the WAN Replication feature for the `tokyo` cluster in Management Center.
Click on **View Cluster** for `tokyo`, go to **Settings** located on the very top right of the user interface and, select **License**.
+
image:wan/provide-license.png[Enter your license key]
Type in your license key and click on **Update License**. Close the license screen.
. Verify that the `tokyo` cluster has WAN Replication enabled. Go to **Cluster > WAN Replication**.
+
image:wan/verify-wan-replication.png[Verify that Tokyo cluster has WAN Replication feature enabled]

== Step 4. Create a Map

In this step you switch to the SQL shell in a terminal, create a map called `cities` for the `tokyo` cluster, and put data into it.

. In a new terminal, start the SQL shell that will be connected to the `tokyo` cluster.
+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run --network hazelcast-network -it --rm hazelcast/hazelcast:{full-version} hz-cli --targets tokyo@172.18.0.4:5701 sql
----

> . Once you see the SQL shell (`sql>`), type the following command and press Enter to create the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Once you see the SQL shell (`sql>`), type the following command and press kbd:[Enter] to create the map.
```

+
[source,shell]
----
CREATE MAPPING cities (__key INT, country VARCHAR, city VARCHAR)
TYPE IMap 
OPTIONS ('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat' = 'json-flat');
----

> . Then, type the following command and press **Enter** to add data to the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Then, type the following command and press kbd:[Enter] to add data to the map.
```

(3,'Czech Republic','Prague'),
(4,'England','London'),
(5,'Turkey','Ankara'),
(6,'United States','Washington, DC');
----
. See the entries by running the following query.
+
[source,shell]
----
SELECT * FROM cities;
----

NOTE: See xref:sql:get-started-sql.adoc[Get Started with SQL over Maps] for more querying options using SQL on maps.

You can also see the map and its entries in Management Center using SQL browser:

. Select *tokyo* in the dropdown field left to *Cluster Connections* on top of the user interface.
. Go to **Storage** > **Maps**, you will see the `cities` map information.
+
image:wan/map-tokyo.png[Cities map in Tokyo cluster]
. Click on **SQL Browser** located on the very top right of the user interface and choose `cities` in the *select a map* field.
The SQL browser then shows the default query in its editor, `SELECT * FROM cities;`. 
. Click on **Execute Query**; you will see the data you've put in. 
+
image:wan/map-entries.png[Management Center's SQL Browser shows the map data]
. Close the SQL browser.

== Step 5. Verify the Replication

With WAN Replication enabled, your `cities` map and its data should have been replicated from the active cluster (Tokyo)

> to the passive one (London). In this step, you'll verify that the `cities` map now also exists in the London cluster.

Reviewer: Can we be consistent in how we refer to cluster names? We usually use inline code style.

> . In Management Center, select `london` in the dropdown field left to "Cluster Connections" on top of the user interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In Management Center, select *london* in the dropdown field left to "Cluster Connections" on top of the user interface.
```

UI text should always be bold.

Reviewer: Please check the rest of the docs for instances where we refer to clicking UI elements. These should be in bold.

. Go to **Storage > Maps** and see that the `cities` map is there.

Additionally, you can query the map entries on the London cluster using the SQL browser in Management Center.

. You first need to create the mapping so that the London cluster can read the map entries.

> Open the SQL browser, type in the same `CREATE MAPPING` command from Step 4 in the editor, and **Execute Query**.

Reviewer: Can we provide the query instead of referring to other steps? It's a bad UX to have to scroll up to find something.

Reviewer: Also, we say SQL query rather than command 😄

. Choose `cities` in the `select a map` field and execute the default `SELECT * FROM "cities"` query.
+
image:wan/entry-tobe-modified.png[]
. Now, you are going to modify the data shown above in the red box (the entry having the key `1`). In the SQL editor, delete the default query and type in the following command.
+
[source,shell]
----
SINK INTO cities VALUES
(1, 'Austria', 'Vienna');
----
Execute the query and see the entry has changed.
+
image:entry-modified.png[Data is modified]
. Close the SQL browser and now go to the passive cluster (London) by choosing `london` in the dropdown field left to "Cluster Connections" on top of the user interface.
. Open the SQL browser, choose `cities` in the `select a map` field and execute the default query.
. You will see the entry having the key `1` is also modified.

In this step, you have seen that a data modification in the active cluster is immediately replicated to the passive one.
If you do the modification first on the passive cluster, you'd see that the modification is not applied to the active one.

== Step 7. Shut Down the Cluster

Shut down the cluster you've created in this tutorial so that you can start a fresh one when you

> move to the other tutorials. To shutdown, close the terminals in which the members are running or press kbd:[Ctrl+C] in each terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
move to the other tutorials. To shut down the cluster, close the terminals in which the members are running or press kbd:[Ctrl+C] in each terminal.
```

Reviewer: Does closing the terminals work? I'm not sure if they continue running in the background.

== Next Steps

See xref:wan:wan.adoc[Synchronizing Data Across Clusters] if you're
interested in learning more about the topics introduced in this tutorial.

> Now that you've completed this tutorial, you can continue with xref:getting-started:blue-green.adoc[Deploy Blue-Green Clusters].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continue learning by configuring clients with a failover cluster in xref:getting-started:blue-green.adoc[Deploy Blue-Green Clusters].
```

= Replicate a Map over Clusters in a WAN

> :description: This tutorial introduces you to WAN Replication. At the end of this tutorial, you'll know how to synchronize a map from one cluster to another, using active-passive mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: This tutorial introduces you to WAN Replication by replicating map entries across two clusters: London and Tokyo. At the end of this tutorial, you'll know how to synchronize a map from one cluster to another.
```

{description}

> WAN Replication can work in two modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAN Replication can work in two modes. This tutorial uses active-passive mode.
```

. Start an active cluster, with WAN Replication configured, which will send updates to the passive cluster.
. Create a map in the active cluster and see that the entries are replicated on the passive cluster.
. Modify some map entries in the active cluster and see the modifications appear in the passive one.

== Before You Begin

To complete this tutorial, you need the following:

[cols="1a,1a"]
|===
|Prerequisites|Useful resources

|Trial license
|https://trialrequest.hazelcast.com/[Hazelcast website]

|Docker image for the full Hazelcast distribution
|xref:get-started-enterprise.adoc[Install Hazelcast Enterprise]

|Docker network with the name `hazelcast-network`
|Use the `docker network create hazelcast-network` command 

|===

== Step 1. Start the Passive Cluster

In this step you'll start an Enterprise cluster called `london` with a single member. This will be the **passive** cluster
which means it does not need WAN Replication to be configured. Run the following Docker command in a terminal.

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run \
    --network hazelcast-network \
    -e HZ_LICENSEKEY=<your license key> \ <1>
    -e HZ_CLUSTERNAME=london \

>     -p 5701:5701 hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise:{full-version}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    hazelcast/hazelcast-enterprise:{full-version}
```

Since we do everything in Docker, there's no need to expose the port.

. You need to provide your license key; this is needed since you are going to use the WAN Replication feature for the `tokyo` cluster in Management Center.
Click on **View Cluster** for `tokyo`, go to **Settings** located on the very top right of the user interface and, select **License**.
+
image:wan/provide-license.png[Enter your license key]
Type in your license key and click on **Update License**. Close the license screen.
. Verify that the `tokyo` cluster has WAN Replication enabled. Go to **Cluster > WAN Replication**.
+
image:wan/verify-wan-replication.png[Verify that Tokyo cluster has WAN Replication feature enabled]

== Step 4. Create a Map

In this step you switch to the SQL shell in a terminal, create a map called `cities` for the `tokyo` cluster, and put data into it.

. In a new terminal, start the SQL shell that will be connected to the `tokyo` cluster.
+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
docker run --network hazelcast-network -it --rm hazelcast/hazelcast:{full-version} hz-cli --targets tokyo@172.18.0.4:5701 sql
----
. Once you see the SQL shell (`sql>`), type the following command and press kbd:[Enter] to create the map.
+

> [source,shell]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,sql]
```

----
CREATE MAPPING cities (__key INT, country VARCHAR, city VARCHAR)
TYPE IMap 
OPTIONS ('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat' = 'json-flat');
----
. Then, type the following command and press kbd:[Enter] to add data to the map.
+

> [source,shell]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,sql]
```

----
INSERT INTO cities VALUES
(1,'Australia','Canberra'),
(2,'Croatia','Zagreb'),
(3,'Czech Republic','Prague'),
(4,'England','London'),
(5,'Turkey','Ankara'),
(6,'United States','Washington, DC');
----
. See the entries by running the following query.
+

> [source,shell]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,sql]
```

+
image:wan/map-tokyo.png[Cities map in Tokyo cluster]
. Click on **SQL Browser** located on the very top right of the user interface and choose `cities` in the *select a map* field.
The SQL browser then shows the default query in its editor, `SELECT * FROM cities;`. 
. Click on **Execute Query**; you will see the data you've put in. 
+
image:wan/map-entries.png[Management Center's SQL Browser shows the map data]
. Close the SQL browser.

== Step 5. Verify the Replication

With WAN Replication enabled, your `cities` map and its data should have been replicated from the active cluster (`tokyo`)
to the passive one (`london`). In this step, you'll verify that the `cities` map now also exists in the `london` cluster.

. In Management Center, select *london* in the dropdown field left to *Cluster Connections* on top of the user interface.
. Go to *Storage* > *Maps* and see that the *cities* map is there.

Additionally, you can query the map entries on the `london` cluster using the SQL browser in Management Center.

. You first need to create the mapping so that the `london` cluster can read the map entries.
Open the SQL browser, type in the following query.
+

> [source,shell]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,sql]
```

----
CREATE MAPPING cities (__key INT, country VARCHAR, city VARCHAR)
TYPE IMap 
OPTIONS ('keyFormat'='int', 'valueFormat' = 'json-flat');
----
. Click **Execute Query**.
+
image:wan/create-mapping-london.png[Create mapping on the London cluster]
. In the `select a map` field, choose `cities`. The editor shows the default `SELECT * FROM cities;` query. Once you execute it, you will see the entries of `cities` map, as in Step 4.
. Close the SQL browser.

== Step 6. Update a Map Entry on the Active Cluster

In this step, you'll update an entry in the `cities` map on the active cluster (`tokyo`) and verify the update is replicated to the passive one (`london`).

. Select *tokyo* in the dropdown field left to *Cluster Connections* on top of the user interface and go to **SQL Browser**.
. Choose *cities* in the *select a map* field and execute the default `SELECT * FROM "cities"` query.
+
image:wan/entry-tobe-modified.png[]
. Now, you are going to modify the data shown above in the red box (the entry having the key `1`). In the SQL editor, delete the default query and type in the following command.
+

> [source,shell]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,sql]
```
